📖 `bento-selector` Create the README.md documentation. (#36324)
ampproject/amphtml: extensions/amp-selector/1.0/README.md

# Bento Selector

## Usage

The Bento Selector is a control that presents a list of options and lets the user choose one or many options; the contents of the options aren't just limited to text. It can be used as a web component[`<bento-selector>`](#web-component), or as a Preact/React functional component [`<BentoSelector>`](#preactreact-component).

### Web Component

You must include each Bento component's required CSS library before adding custom styles in order to guarantee proper loading. Or use the lightweight pre-uprgrade styles available inline. See [Layout and Style](#layout-and-style)

#### Example: Import via npm

[example preview="top-frame" playground="false"]

Install via npm:

```sh
npm install @ampproject/bento-selector
```

```javascript
import '@ampproject/bento-selector';
```

[/example]

#### Example: Include via `<script>`

[example preview="top-frame" playground="false"]

```html
<head>
  <script src="https://cdn.ampproject.org/custom-elements-polyfill.js"></script>
  <!-- These styles prevent Cumulative Layout Shift on the unupgraded custom element -->
  <style data-bento-boilerplate>

>     bento-selector {
>       display: block;
>       overflow: hidden;
>       position: relative;
>     }

Reviewer: bento-selector is a container element so we don't want to hide its children and it should not overflow
```suggestion
    bento-selector {
      display: block;
    }
```

  </style>
  <script async src="https://cdn.ampproject.org/v0/bento-selector-1.0.js"></script>
  <style>
    bento-selector{
      width: 375px;
      height: 472px;
    }

>   </style>

Reviewer: This shouldn't be necessary should it?

</head>

<bento-selector class="sample-selector" layout="container">

>   <bento-selector-option option="1">Option 1</bento-selector-option>
>   <bento-selector-option option="2">Option 2</bento-selector-option>
>   <bento-selector-option option="3">Option 3</bento-selector-option>
>   <bento-selector-option option="4">Option 4</bento-selector-option>

Reviewer: `bento-selector-option` does not exist
```suggestion
  <ul>
    <li option="1">Option 1</li>
    <li option="2">Option 2</li>
    <li option="3">Option 3</li>
    <li option="4">Option 4</li>
  </ul>
```

> </bento-selector

Reviewer: needs a closing tag
```suggestion
</bento-selector>
```

```

[/example]

#### Usage notes

> -   An `bento-selector` can contain any arbitrary HTML elements or AMP components (e.g., `bento-carousel`, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   A `bento-selector` can contain any arbitrary HTML elements or web components (e.g., `bento-carousel`, etc.).
```

> -   An `bento-selector` cannot contain any nested `bento-selector` controls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   A `bento-selector` cannot contain any nested `bento-selector` controls.
```

-   Preselected options can be set by adding the `selected` attribute to the element (e.g., `<li option="b" selected></li>`).
-   To allow for multiple selections, add the `multiple` attribute to the `bento-selector` element. By default, the `bento-selector` allows for one selection at a time.
-   To disable the entire `bento-selector`, add the `disabled` attribute to the `bento-selector` element.
-   When an `bento-selector` contains a `name` attribute and the `bento-selector` is inside a `form` tag, if a submit event occurs on the form, the `bento-selector`behaves like a radio-button/checkbox group and submits the selected values (the ones assigned to the option) against the name of the `bento-selector`.

#### Layout and Style

Each Bento component has a small CSS library you must include to guarantee proper loading without [content shifts](https://web.dev/cls/). Because of order-based specificity, you must manually ensure that stylesheets are included before any custom styles.

You may also make the light-weight pre-upgrade styles available inline:

```html
<style data-bento-boilerplate>
  bento-selector{
    display: block;

>     overflow: hidden;
>     position: relative;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  }
</style>
```

#### Attributes on `<bento-selector>`

**disabled, form, multiple, name**

The attributes above behave the same way as they do on a standard HTML [`<select>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/HTML/Element/select) element.

**keyboard-select-mode**

The `keyboard-select-mode` attribute dictates the keyboard navigation behavior for options inside `<bento-selector>`.

<ul>
  <li>
    `none` (default): The tab key changes focus between items in the `<bento-selector>`. The user must press enter or space to change the selection. Arrow keys are disabled.
  </li>
  <li>
    `focus`: Tab key gives focus to `<bento-selector>`. The user navigates between items with the arrow keys. Must press space or enter to change the selection.
  </li>
  <li>
    `select`: Tab key gives focus to `<bento-selector>`. The selection changes as the user navigates options with arrow keys.
  </li>
</ul>

> #### Attributes on `<bento-selector-option>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Attributes on option elements
```

> **option**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**option (required)**
```

```

### Preact/React Component

The examples below demonstrate use of the `<BentoSelector>` as a functional component usable with the Preact or React libraries.

#### Example: Import via npm

[example preview="top-frame" playground="false"]

Install via npm:

```sh
npm install @ampproject/bento-selector
```

```javascript
import React from 'react';
import { BentoSelector, BentoSelectorOption} from '@ampproject/bento-selector/react';
import '@ampproject/bento-selector/styles.css';

function App() {
  return (
    <BentoSelector aria-label="Option menu">
      <BentoSelectorOption option="1">Option 1</BentoSelectorOption>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="2">Option 2</BentoSelectorOption>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="3">Option 3</BentoSelectorOption>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="4">Option 4</BentoSelectorOption>
    </BentoSelector>
  );
}
```

[/example]

#### Layout and Style

Each Bento component has a small CSS library you must include to guarantee proper loading without [content shifts](https://web.dev/cls/). Because of order-based specificity, you must manually ensure that stylesheets are included before any custom styles.

```html

> <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="https://cdn.ampproject.org/v0/amp-facebook-1.0.css">

Reviewer 2: should this be `amp-facebook-1.0.css`?

Or should it be `bento-selector-1.0.css`

```suggestion
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="https://cdn.ampproject.org/v0/bento-selector-1.0.css">
```

```

Alternatively, you may also make the light-weight pre-upgrade styles available inline:

```html
<style data-bento-boilerplate>
 BentoSelector{
    display: block;
    overflow: hidden;
    position: relative;
  }
</style>

> ```

Reviewer: The Preact section is not concerned with upgrading styles since it is not a web component.

Please instead use the section from other README's Preact section, which discusses how to apply style via `styles` or `className` props.

> #### Attributes on `<BentoSelector>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Props for `<BentoSelector>`
```

**disabled, form, multiple, name**

The attributes above behave the same way as they do on a standard HTML [`<select>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/docs/Web/HTML/Element/select) element.

> **keyboard-select-mode**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**keyboardSelectMode**
```

> The `keyboard-select-mode` attribute dictates the keyboard navigation behavior for options inside `<BentoSelector>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `keyboardSelectMode` prop dictates the keyboard navigation behavior for options inside `<BentoSelector>`.
```

<ul>
  <li>
    `none` (default): The tab key changes focus between items in the `<BentoSelector>`. The user must press enter or space to change the selection. Arrow keys are disabled.
  </li>
  <li>
    `focus`: Tab key gives focus to `<BentoSelector>`. The user navigates between items with the arrow keys. Must press space or enter to change the selection.
  </li>
  <li>
    `select`: Tab key gives focus to `<BentoSelector>`. The selection changes as the user navigates options with arrow keys.
  </li>
</ul>

> #### Attributes on `<BentoSelectorOption>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Props for `<BentoSelectorOption>`
```

**option**

Indicates that the option is selectable. If a value is specified, the contents of the value is submitted with the form.

**disabled, selected**

The attributes above behave the same way as they do on a standard HTML [`<option>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/option) element.

> #### Actions

Reviewer: Please add an example for how to pass the ref and use the api on the ref, like in other Preact README files. Here's the section from sidebar:

```md
#### Interactivity and API usage

Bento components are highly interactive through their API. The `BentoSidebar` component API is accessible by passing a `ref`:

``javascript
import React, {createRef} from 'react';
const ref = createRef();

function App() {
  return (
    <BentoSidebar ref={ref}>
      <ul>
        <li>Nav item 1</li>
        <li>Nav item 2</li>
        <li>Nav item 3</li>
        <li>Nav item 4</li>
        <li>Nav item 5</li>
        <li>Nav item 6</li>
      </ul>
    </BentoSidebar>
  );
}
``

##### Actions

The `BentoSidebar` API allows you to perform the following actions:

**open()**
Opens the sidebar.

``javascript
ref.current..open();
``

**close()**
Closes the sidebar.

``javascript
ref.current..close();
``

**toggle()**
Toggles the sidebar open state.

``javascript
ref.current..toggle(0);
``
```

Note: Please update the double ticks to triple ticks for the code snippets above -- I removed them here so they would all be shown in one markdown block in the GH formatting.

The `BentoSelector` API allows you to perform the following actions:

**selectBy(delta: number)**
Closes the selector.

```js

> api.selectBy(1); // Select next option in DOM sequence.

Reviewer 2: should we specify that this `api` object comes from the `ref.current`? Or that's where I assume it comes from looking at storybook.

api.selectBy(-2); // Select the option that is two previous in DOM sequence.
```

**toggle(optionValue: string, opt_select: boolean|undefined)**
Toggles the option with the given `optionValue` to be selected or deselected based on `opt_select`. If `opt_select` is not present, then the option will be selected if currently not selected, and deselected if currently selected.

```js
api.toggle("a"); // Toggle the item with the attribute `option="a"`.
api.toggle("1", true); // Select the item with the attribute `option="1"`.
```

#### Events

The `BentoSelector` API allows you to register and respond to the following events:

**select**

This event is triggered when the user selects an option.
Multi-selectors and single-selectors fire this when selecting or unselecting options.
Tapping disabled options does not trigger the `select` event.

<ul>
  <li>
  `event.data.targetOption` contains the `option` attribute value of the selected element.</li>
  <li>
  `event.data.selectedOptions` contains an array of the `option` attribute values of all selected elements.
  </li>
</ul>

```js
selector.addEventListener("select", (e) => console.log(e.data.targetOption))

> ```

Reviewer: the event listener in the preact world is the `onChange` prop, here's a similar example from base-carousel's readme:
```md
##### Events

The `BentoBaseCarousel` API allows you to register and respond to the following events:

**onSlideChange**

This event is triggered when the index displayed by the carousel has changed.

``jsx
<BentoBaseCarousel onSlideChange={(index) => console.log(index)}>
  <img src="puppies.jpg" />
  <img src="kittens.jpg" />
  <img src="hamsters.jpg" />
</BentoBaseCarousel>
``
```

  </li>
</ul>

#### Props for `<BentoSelectorOption>`

**option**

Indicates that the option is selectable. If a value is specified, the contents of the value is submitted with the form.

**disabled, selected**

The attributes above behave the same way as they do on a standard HTML [`<option>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/option) element.

#### Interactivity and API usage

Bento components are highly interactive through their API. The `BentoSelector` component API is accessible by passing a `ref`:

```javascript
import React, {createRef} from 'react';
const ref = createRef();

function App() {
  return (
    <BentoSelector ref={ref}>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="1">Option 1</BentoSelectorOption>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="2">Option 2</BentoSelectorOption>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="3">Option 3</BentoSelectorOption>
      <BentoSelectorOption option="4">Option 4</BentoSelectorOption>
    </BentoSelector>
  );
}
```

#### Actions

The `BentoSelector` API allows you to perform the following actions:

**selectBy(delta: number)**
Closes the selector.

```js

> ref.selectBy(1); // Select next option in DOM sequence.
> ref.selectBy(-2); // Select the option that is two previous in DOM sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ref.current.selectBy(1); // Select next option in DOM sequence.
ref.current.selectBy(-2); // Select the option that is two previous in DOM sequence.
```

```

**toggle(optionValue: string, opt_select: boolean|undefined)**
Toggles the option with the given `optionValue` to be selected or deselected based on `opt_select`. If `opt_select` is not present, then the option will be selected if currently not selected, and deselected if currently selected.

```js

> ref.toggle("1"); // Toggle the item with the attribute `option="1"`.
> ref.toggle("2", true); // Select the item with the attribute `option="2"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ref.current.toggle("1"); // Toggle the item with the attribute `option="1"`.
ref.current.toggle("2", true); // Select the item with the attribute `option="2"`.
```

```

#### Events

**select**

This event is triggered when the user selects an option.
Multi-selectors and single-selectors fire this when selecting or unselecting options.

> Tapping disabled options does not trigger the `select` event.

Reviewer: Instead of emitting a select event, the component calls a given `onChange` prop with keys `value` - array of selected values, and `option` - the option whose selected state was changed.
